=== PAGE 223 ===
185
CHAPTER 7
Transmission Media
e discussed many issues related to the physical layer in Chapters 3 through 6. In
this chapter, we discuss transmission me dia. We definitely need transmission
media to conduct signals from the source to the destination. However, the media can be
wired or wireless. 
This chapter is divided into three sections:
❑ The first section introduces the transmission media and defines its position in the
Internet model. It shows that we can classify transmission media into two broad
categories: guided and unguided media.
❑ The second section discusses guided media.  The first part describes twisted-pair
cables and their characteristics and applications. The second part describes coaxial
cables and their characteristics and applications. Finally, the third part describes
fiber-optic cables and their characteristics and applications. 
❑ The third section discusses unguided media. The first part describes radio waves
and their characteristics and applications. The second part describes microwaves
and their characteristics and applications. Finally, the third part describes infrared
waves and their characteristics and applications. 
W
=== PAGE 224 ===
186 PART II PHYSICAL LAYER
7.1 INTRODUCTION
Transmission media are actually located below the physical layer and are directly con-
trolled by the physical layer. We could say that transmission media belong to layer
zero. Figure 7.1 shows the position of transmission media in relation to the physical
layer. 
A transmission medium can be broadly defined as anything that can carry infor-
mation from a source to a destination. For example, the transmission medium for two
people having a dinner conversation is the air.  The air can also be used to convey the
message in a smoke signal or semaphore.  For a written message, the transmission
medium might be a mail carrier, a truck, or an airplane. 
In data communications the definition of the information and the transmission
medium is more specific. The transmission medium is usually free space, metallic cable,
or fiber-optic cable. The information is usually a signal that is the result of a conversion
of data from another form.
The use of long-distance co mmunication using electric signals started with the
invention of the telegraph by Morse in the 19th century. Communication by telegraph
was slow and dependent on a metallic medium.
Extending the range of the human voice became possible when the telephone was
invented in 1869. Telephone communication at that time also needed a metallic medium
to carry the electric signals that were the result of a conversion from the human voice.
The communication was, however, unreliable due to the poor quality of the wires. The
lines were often noisy and the technology was unsophisticated.
Wireless communication started in 1895 when Hertz was able to send high-
frequency signals. Later, Marconi devised a method to send telegraph-type messages
over the Atlantic Ocean.
We have come a long way. Better metallic media have been invented (twisted-pair
and coaxial cables, for example). The use of optical fibers has increased the data rate
incredibly. Free space (air, vacuum, and water)  is used more efficiently, in part due
to the technologies (such as modulation and multiplexing) discussed in the previous
chapters. 
As discussed in Chapter 3, computers and other telecommunication devices use
signals to represent data. These signals are transmitted from one device to another in the
form of electromagnetic energy, which is propagated through transmission media. 
Electromagnetic energy, a combination of electric and ma gnetic fields vibrating in
relation to each other, includes power, radio waves, infrared light, visible light, ultraviolet
Figure 7.1 Transmission medium and physical layer
Physical layer Physical layer
Cable or air
Sender Receiver
Transmission medium
=== PAGE 225 ===
CHAPTER 7 TRANSMISSION MEDIA 187
light, and X, gamma, and cosmic rays. E ach of these constitutes a portion of the elec-
tromagnetic spectrum. Not all portions of the spectrum are currently usable for tele-
communications, however. The media to harnes s those that are usable are also limited
to a few types.
In telecommunications, transmission medi a can be divided into two broad catego-
ries: guided and unguided. Guided media include twisted-pair cable, coaxial cable, and
fiber-optic cable. Unguided medium is free space. Figure 7.2 shows this taxonomy. 
7.2 GUIDED MEDIA
Guided media,  which are those that provide a conduit from one device to another,
include twisted-pair cabl e, coaxial cable,  and fiber-optic cable. A signal traveling
along any of these media is directed and contained by the physical limits of the
medium. Twisted-pair and coaxial cable us e metallic (copper) conductors that accept
and transport signals in the form of electric current. Optical fiber is a cable that accepts
and transports signals in the form of light.
7.2.1 Twisted-Pair Cable
A twisted pair consists of two conductors (normally copper), each with its own plastic
insulation, twisted together, as shown in Figure 7.3.  
One of the wires is used to carry signals to the receiver, and the other is used only
as a ground reference. The receiver uses the difference between the two. 
In addition to the signal sent by the sender on one of the wires, interference (noise)
and crosstalk may affect both wires and create unwanted signals. 
If the two wires are parallel, the effect of these unwanted signals is not the same in
both wires because they are at different locations relative to the noise or crosstalk sources
(e.g., one is closer and the other is farther). This results in a difference at the receiver.
Figure 7.2 Classes of transmission media
Figure 7.3 Twisted-pair cable
Transmission
media
Guided
(wired)
Unguided
(wireless)
Twisted-pair
cable
Coaxial
cable
Fiber-optic
cable Radio wave Microwave Infrared
ConductorInsulator
=== PAGE 226 ===
188 PART II PHYSICAL LAYER
By twisting the pairs, a balance is maintain ed. For example, suppose in one twist, one
wire is closer to the noise source and the other is farther; in the next twist, the reverse is
true. Twisting makes it probable that both wires are equally affected by external influ-
ences (noise or crosstalk). This means that the receiver, which calculates the difference
between the two, receives no unwanted signals. The unwanted signals are mostly can-
celed out. From the above discussion, it is clear that the number of twists per unit of
length (e.g., inch) has some effect on the quality of the cable. 
Unshielded Versus Shielded Twisted-Pair Cable
The most common twisted-pair cable used in communications is referred to as
unshielded twisted-pair (UTP). IBM has also produced a version of twisted-pair cable
for its use, called shielded twisted-pair (STP). STP cable has a metal foil or braided-
mesh covering that encases each pair of  insulated conductors. Although metal casing
improves the quality of cable by preventing th e penetration of noise or crosstalk, it is
bulkier and more expensive. Figure 7.4 shows the difference between UTP and STP.
Our discussion focuses primarily on UTP because STP is seldom used outside of IBM. 
Categories
The Electronic Industries Association (E IA) has developed standards to classify
unshielded twisted-pair cable into seven categories. Categories are determined by cable
quality, with 1 as the lowest and 7 as th e highest. Each EIA category is suitable for
specific uses. Table 7.1 shows these categories.  
Figure 7.4 UTP and STP cables
Table 7.1 Categories of unshielded twisted-pair cables
Category Specification
Data Rate
(Mbps) Use
1 Unshielded twisted-pair used in telephone < 0.1 Telephone
2 Unshielded twis ted-pair originally used in
T lines
2 T-1 lines
3 Improved CAT 2 used in LANs 10 LANs
4 Improved CAT 3 used in Token Ring networks 20 LANs
5 Cable wire is normally 24 AWG with a jacket 
and outside sheath 
100 LANs
a. UTP b. STP
Plastic cover Plastic cover
Metal shield
=== PAGE 227 ===
CHAPTER 7 TRANSMISSION MEDIA 189
Connectors
The most common UTP connector is RJ45 (RJ stands for registered jack), as shown
in Figure 7.5. The RJ45 is a keyed connector, meaning the connector can be inserted in
only one way. 
Performance
One way to measure the performance of twis ted-pair cable is to compare attenuation
versus frequency and distance. A twisted-pair cable can pass a wide range of frequencies.
However, Figure 7.6 shows that with increasing frequency, the attenuation, measured in
decibels per kilometer (dB/km), sharply increases with frequencies above 100 kHz. Note
that gauge is a measure of the thickness of the wire. 
Applications
Twisted-pair cables are used in telephone lines to provide voice and data channels.
The local loop—the line that connects subscribers to the central telephone office—
commonly consists of unshielded twisted-pa ir cables. We discuss telephone networks
in Chapter 14.
The DSL lines that are used by the tele phone companies to provide high-data-rate
connections also use the high -bandwidth capability of unshielded twisted-pair cables.
We discuss DSL technology in Chapter 14. 
5E An extension to category 5 that includes 
extra features to minimize the crosstalk and 
electromagnetic interference
125 LANs
6 A new category with matched components 
coming from the same manufacturer. The 
cable must be tested at a 200-Mbps data rate.
200 LANs
7 Sometimes called SSTP (shielded screen 
twisted-pair). Each pair is individually 
wrapped in a helical metallic foil followed by 
a metallic foil shield in addition to the outside 
sheath. The shield decreases the effect of 
crosstalk and increases the data rate.
600 LANs
Figure 7.5 UTP connector
Table 7.1 Categories of unshielded twisted-pair cables (continued)
Category Specification
Data Rate
(Mbps) Use
12345678 12345678
RJ-45 Female RJ-45 Male
=== PAGE 228 ===
190 PART II PHYSICAL LAYER
Local-area networks, such as 10Base-T and 100Base-T, also use twisted-pair cables.
We discuss these networks in Chapter 13.
7.2.2 Coaxial Cable
Coaxial cable (or coax) carries signals of higher frequency ranges than those in twisted-
pair cable, in part because the two media are constructed quite differently. Instead of
having two wires, coax has a central core conductor of solid or stranded wire (usually
copper) enclosed in an insulating sheath, which is, in turn, encased in an outer conductor
of metal foil, braid, or a combination of the two. The outer metallic wrapping serves
both as a shield against noise and as the second conductor, which completes the circuit.
This outer conductor is also enclosed in an insulating sheath, and the whole cable is
protected by a plastic cover (see Figure 7.7).
Coaxial Cable Standards
Coaxial cables are categorized by their Radio Government (RG) ratings. Each RG
number denotes a unique set of physical specifications, including the wire gauge of the
Figure 7.6 UTP performance
Figure 7.7 Coaxial cable
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
Attenuation (dB/km)
1 10 100 1000
f (kHz)
26 gauge
24 gauge
22 gauge
18 gauge
Gauge
18
22
24
26
Diameter (inches)
0.0403
0.02320
0.02010
0.0159
Plastic cover
Inner conductor
Outer conductor
(shield)
Insulator
Insulator
=== PAGE 229 ===
CHAPTER 7 TRANSMISSION MEDIA 191
inner conductor, the thickness and type of th e inner insulator, the construction of the
shield, and the size and type of the outer cas ing. Each cable defined by an RG rating is
adapted for a specialized function, as shown in Table 7.2. 
Coaxial Cable Connectors
To connect coaxial cable to devices, we need coaxial connector s. The most common
type of connector used today is the Bayonet Neill-Concelman (BNC) connector.
Figure 7.8 shows three popular types of these connectors: the BNC connector, the
BNC T connector, and the BNC terminator.
The BNC connector is used to connect the end of the cable to a device, such as a
TV set. The BNC T connector is used in Ethernet networks (see Chapter 13) to branch
out to a connection to a computer or other device. The BNC terminator is used at the
end of the cable to prevent the reflection of the signal.
Performance
As we did with twisted-pair cable, we can measure the performance of a coaxial cable.
We notice in Figure 7.9 that the attenuation is much higher in coaxial cable than in
twisted-pair cable. In other words, although coaxial cable has a much higher bandwidth,
the signal weakens rapidly and requires the frequent use of repeaters.  
Applications
Coaxial cable was widely used in analog telephone networks where a single coaxial
network could carry 10,000 voice signals. Later it was used in digital telephone
networks where a single coaxial cable could carry digital data up to 600 Mbps. How-
ever, coaxial cable in telephone networks ha s largely been replaced today with fiber-
optic cable.
Table 7.2
Categories of coaxial cables
Category Impedance Use
RG-59 75 Ω Cable TV
RG-58 50 Ω Thin Ethernet
RG-11 50 Ω Thick Ethernet
Figure 7.8 BNC connectors
Cable BNC T
BNC connector 50-W
BNC terminator
Ground
wire
=== PAGE 230 ===
192 PART II PHYSICAL LAYER
Cable TV networks (see Chapter 14) also use coaxial cables. In the traditional cable
TV network, the entire network used coaxial cable. Later, however, cable TV providers
replaced most of the media with fiber-optic cable; hybrid networks use coaxial cable
only at the network boundaries, near the consumer premises. Cable TV uses RG-59
coaxial cable.
Another common application of coaxial cable is in traditional Ethernet LANs (see
Chapter 13). Because of its high bandwidth, and consequently high data rate, coaxial
cable was chosen for digital transmission in early Ethernet LANs. The 10Base-2, or Thin
Ethernet, uses RG-58 coaxial cable with BNC connectors to transmit data at 10 Mbps
with a range of 185 m. The 10Base5, or Thick Ethernet, uses RG-11 (thick coaxial cable)
to transmit 10 Mbps with a range of 5000 m. Thick Ethernet has specialized connectors. 
7.2.3 Fiber-Optic Cable
A fiber-optic cable is made of glass or plastic and transmits signals in the form of light.
To understand optical fiber, we first need to explore several aspects of the nature of
light.
Light travels in a straight line as long as it is moving through a single uniform sub-
stance. If a ray of light traveling through one substance suddenly enters another substance
(of a different density), the ray changes direction. Figure 7.10 shows how a ray of light
changes direction when going from a more dense to a less dense substance. 
As the figure shows, if the angle of incidence I (the angle the ray makes with the
line perpendicular to the interface between  the two substances) is less than the critical
angle, the ray refracts and moves closer to the surface. If the angle of incidence is
equal to the critical angle, the light bends along the interface. If the angle is greater than
the critical angle, the ray reflects  (makes a turn) and travels again in the denser
Figure 7.9 Coaxial cable performance
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
Attenuation (dB/km)
0.01 1.00.1 10 100
f (MHz)
0.7/2.9 mm
1.2/4.4 mm
2.6/9.5 mm
=== PAGE 231 ===
CHAPTER 7 TRANSMISSION MEDIA 193
substance. Note that the critical angle is a property of the substance, and its value differs
from one substance to another. 
Optical fibers use reflection to guide light through a channel. A glass or plastic core
is surrounded by a cladding of less dense glass or plastic. The difference in density of the
two materials must be such that a beam of light moving through the core is reflected off
the cladding instead of being refracted into it. See Figure 7.11. 
Propagation Modes
Current technology supports two modes (multimode and single mode) for propagating light
along optical channels, each requiring fiber with different physical characteristics. Multi-
mode can be implemented in two forms: step-index or graded-index (see Figure 7.12).
Multimode
Multimode is so named because multiple b eams from a light source move through the
core in different paths. How these beams move within the cable depends on the struc-
ture of the core, as shown in Figure 7.13. 
Figure 7.10 Bending of light ray
Figure 7.11 Optical fiber
Figure 7.12 Propagation modes
I
More
dense
More
dense
More
dense
I < critical angle,
refraction 
I = critical angle,
refraction 
I > critical angle,
reflection 
Less
dense
Less
dense
Less
dense
I I
Cladding
ReceiverCore
Cladding
Sender
Multimode
Mode
Single mode
Step index Graded index
=== PAGE 232 ===
194 PART II PHYSICAL LAYER
In multimode step-index fiber, the density of the core remains constant from the
center to the edges. A beam of light moves through this constant density in a straight
line until it reaches th e interface of the core and the cladding. At the interface, there is
an abrupt change due to a lower density; this alters the angle of the beam’s motion. The
term step-index refers to the suddenness of this change, which contributes to the distor-
tion of the signal as it passes through the fiber.
A second type of fiber, called multimode graded-index fiber, decreases this dis-
tortion of the signal th rough the cable. The word index here refers to the index of
refraction. As we saw above, the index of refraction is related to density. A graded-
index fiber, therefore, is one with varying densities. Density is highest at the center of
the core and decreases gradually to its lowest at the edge. Figure 7.13 shows the impact
of this variable density on the propagation of light beams.
Single-Mode 
Single-mode uses step-index fiber and a highly focused source of light that limits
beams to a small range of angles, all close to the horizontal. The single-mode fiber
itself is manufactured with a much smaller di ameter than that of multimode fiber, and
with substantially lower density (index of refraction). The decrease in density results in
a critical angle that is close enough to 90 ° to make the propagation of beams almost
horizontal. In this case, pr opagation of different beams is  almost identical, and delays
are negligible. All the beams arrive at the destination “together” and can be recombined
with little distortion to the signal (see Figure 7.13).
Figure 7.13 Modes
Source Destination
Source
Source
Destination
Destination
a. Multimode, step index
b. Multimode, graded index
c. Single mode

=== PAGE 233 ===
CHAPTER 7 TRANSMISSION MEDIA 195
Fiber Sizes
Optical fibers are defined by the ratio of the diameter of their core to the diameter of
their cladding, both expressed in micrometers. The common sizes are shown in Table 7.3.
Note that the last size listed is for single-mode only.
Cable Composition
Figure 7.14 shows the composition of a t ypical fiber-optic cable. The outer jacket is
made of either PVC or Teflon. Inside the jacket are Kevlar strands to strengthen the cable.
Kevlar is a strong material used in the fabrication of bulletproof vests. Below the Kevlar is
another plastic coating to cushion the fiber. The fiber is at the center of the cable, and it
consists of cladding and core. 
Fiber-Optic Cable Connectors
There are three types of connectors for fiber-optic cables, as shown in Figure 7.15. The
subscriber channel (SC) connector  is used for cable TV . It uses a push/pull locking
system. The straight-tip (ST) connector  is used for connecting cable to networking
devices. It uses a bayonet locking sy stem and is more reliable than SC. MT-RJ is a
connector that is the same size as RJ45. 
Performance
The plot of attenuation versus wavelength in Figure 7.16 shows a very interesting
phenomenon in fiber-optic cable. Attenuation is flatter than in the case of twisted-pair
cable and coaxial cable. The performance is  such that we need fewer (actually one-
tenth as many) repeaters when we use fiber-optic cable. 
Table 7.3
Fiber types
Type Core (μm) Cladding (μm) Mode
50/125   50.0 125 Multimode, graded index
62.5/125   62.5 125 Multimode, graded index
100/125 100.0 125 Multimode, graded index
7/125     7.0 125 Single mode
Figure 7.14 Fiber construction
Outer jacket
Plastic
buffer
DuPont Kevlar
for strength
Glass or
plastic core
Cladding
=== PAGE 234 ===
196 PART II PHYSICAL LAYER
Applications
Fiber-optic cable is often found in backbon e networks because its wide bandwidth is
cost-effective. Today, with wavelength-division multiplexing (WDM), we can transfer
data at a rate of 1600 Gbps. The SONET network that we discuss in Chapter 14 provides
such a backbone.
Some cable TV companies use a combination of optical fiber and coaxial cable,
thus creating a hybrid network. Optical fiber provides the backbone structure while
coaxial cable provides the connection to the user premises. This is a cost-effective con-
figuration since the narrow bandwidth requirement at the user end does not justify the
use of optical fiber. 
Figure 7.15 Fiber-optic cable connectors
Figure 7.16 Optical fiber performance
SC connector
MT-RJ connector
ST connector
RX
 TX
100
50
10
5
1
0.5
0.1
0.05 Loss (dB/km)
0.01 1200 14001000800 1600 1800
Wavelength (nm)
=== PAGE 235 ===
CHAPTER 7 TRANSMISSION MEDIA 197
Local-area networks such as 100Base-FX network (Fast Ethernet) and 1000Base-X
also use fiber-optic cable. 
Advantages and Disadvantages of Optical Fiber
Advantages
Fiber-optic cable has several advantages over metallic cable (twisted-pair or coaxial).
❑ Higher bandwidth. Fiber-optic cable can support dramatically higher bandwidths
(and hence data rates) than either twisted-pair or coaxial cable. Currently, data rates
and bandwidth utilization over fiber-optic cable are limited not by the medium but
by the signal generation and reception technology available.
❑ Less signal attenuation. Fiber-optic transmission distance is significantly greater
than that of other guided media. A signal can run for 50 km without requiring
regeneration. We need repeaters every 5 km for coaxial or twisted-pair cable.
❑ Immunity to electromagnetic interference. Electromagnetic noise cannot affect
fiber-optic cables. 
❑ Resistance to corrosive materials. Glass is more resistant to corrosive materials
than copper. 
❑ Light weight. Fiber-optic cables are much lighter than copper cables.
❑ Greater immunity to tapping. Fiber-optic cables are more immune to tapping than
copper cables. Copper cables create antenna effects that can easily be tapped.
Disadvantages
There are some disadvantages in the use of optical fiber.
❑ Installation and maintenance. Fiber-optic cable is a relatively new technology. Its
installation and maintenance require expertise that is not yet available everywhere.
❑ Unidirectional light propagation. Propagation of light is unidirectional. If we
need bidirectional communication, two fibers are needed.
❑ Cost. The cable and the interfaces are relatively more expensive than those of other
guided media. If the demand for bandwidth is not high, often the use of optical fiber
cannot be justified. 
7.3 UNGUIDED MEDIA: WIRELESS
Unguided medium transport electromagnetic waves without using a physical conduc-
tor. This type of communication is often referred to as wireless communication. Sig-
nals are normally broadcast through free space  and thus are available to anyone who
has a device capable of receiving them. 
Figure 7.17 shows the part of the electromagnetic spectrum, ranging from 3 kHz to
900 THz, used for wireless communication. 
Unguided signals can travel from the source to the destination in several ways: ground
propagation, sky propagation, and line-of-sight propagation, as shown in Figure 7.18.
=== PAGE 236 ===
198 PART II PHYSICAL LAYER
In ground propagation, radio waves travel through the lowest portion of the atmo-
sphere, hugging the earth. These low-frequency signals emanate in all directions from the
transmitting antenna and follow the curvature of the planet. Distance depends on the
amount of power in the signal: The greater  the power, the greater the distance. In sky
propagation, higher-frequency radio waves radiate upward into the ionosphere (the layer
of atmosphere where particles exist as ions) where they are reflected back to earth. This
type of transmission allows for greater distances with lower output power. In line-of-sight
propagation, very high-frequency signals are transmitted in straight lines directly from
antenna to antenna. Antennas must be directional, facing each other, and either tall
enough or close enough together not to be affected by the curvature of the earth. Line-of-
sight propagation is tricky because radio transmissions cannot be completely focused. 
The section of the electromagnetic spectrum defined as radio waves and microwaves
is divided into eight ranges, called bands, each regulated by government authorities.
These bands are rated from very low frequency (VLF) to extremely high frequency (EHF). 
Table 7.4 lists these bands, their ranges, propagation methods, and some applications.
Figure 7.17 Electromagnetic spectrum for wireless communication
Figure 7.18 Propagation methods
Table 7.4 Bands
Band Range Propagation Application
very low frequency (VLF) 3–30 kHz Ground Long-range radio 
navigation
low frequency (LF) 30–300 kHz Ground Radio beacons and 
navigational locators
400
THz
300
GHz
3
kHz
900
THz
Radio wave and microwave Infrared
Light wave
Ionosphere Ionosphere
Ground propagation
(below 2 MHz)
Sky propagation
(2–30 MHz)
Ionosphere
Line-of-sight propagation
(above 30 MHz)
=== PAGE 237 ===
CHAPTER 7 TRANSMISSION MEDIA 199
We can divide wireless transmission into three broad groups: radio waves, micro-
waves, and infrared waves. 
7.3.1 Radio Waves
Although there is no clear-cut demarcation between radio waves and microwaves, elec-
tromagnetic waves ranging in frequencies between 3 kHz and 1 GHz are normally called
radio waves; waves ranging in frequencies between 1 and 300 GHz are called micro-
waves. However, the behavior of the waves, rather than the frequencies, is a better
criterion for classification. 
Radio waves, for the most part, are omni directional. When an antenna transmits
radio waves, they are propagated in all di rections. This means that the sending and
receiving antennas do not have to be alig ned. A sending antenna sends waves that can
be received by any receiving antenna. The omnidirectional property has a disadvantage,
too. The radio waves transmitted by one an tenna are susceptible to interference by
another antenna that may send signals using the same frequency or band. 
Radio waves, particularly those waves that propagate in the sky mode, can travel
long distances. This makes radio waves a good candidate for long-distance broadcast-
ing such as AM radio.
Radio waves, particularly those of lo w and medium frequencies, can penetrate
walls. This characteristic can be both an advantage and a disadvantage. It is an advan-
tage because, for example, an AM radio can receive signals inside a building. It is a dis-
advantage because we cannot isolate a communication to just inside or outside a
building. The radio wave band is relatively narrow, just under 1 GHz, compared to
the microwave band. When this band is di vided into subbands, the subbands are also
narrow, leading to a low data rate for digital communications.
Almost the entire band is regulated by authorities (e.g., the FCC in the United
States). Using any part of the band requires permission from the authorities.
Omnidirectional Antenna
Radio waves use omnidirectional antennas  that send out signals in all directions.
Based on the wavelength, strength, and the purpose of transmission, we can have sev-
eral types of antennas. Figure 7.19 shows an omnidirectional antenna. 
middle frequency (MF) 300 kHz–3 MHz Sky AM radio
high frequency (HF) 3–30 MHz Sky Citizens band (CB),
ship/aircraft
very high frequency (VHF) 30–300 MHz Sky and
line-of-sight
VHF TV , FM radio
ultrahigh frequency (UHF) 300 MHz–3 GHz Line-of-sight UHF TV , cellular phones, 
paging, satellite
superhigh frequency (SF) 3–30 GHz Line-of-sight Satellite
extremely high frequency (EHF) 30–300 GHz Line-of-sight Radar, satellite
Table 7.4 Bands (continued)
Band Range Propagation Application
=== PAGE 238 ===
200 PART II PHYSICAL LAYER
Applications
The omnidirectional characteristics of radio waves make them useful for multicasting,
in which there is one sender but many rece ivers. AM and FM radio, television, mari-
time radio, cordless phones, and paging are examples of multicasting. 
7.3.2 Microwaves
Electromagnetic waves having frequencie s between 1 and 300 GHz are called micro-
waves. Microwaves are unid irectional. When an antenn a transmits microwaves, they
can be narrowly focused. This means that the sending and receiving antennas need to
be aligned. The unidirectional property ha s an obvious advantage. A pair of antennas
can be aligned without interfering with another pair of aligned antennas. The following
describes some characteristics of microwave propagation:
❑ Microwave propagation is line-of-sight. Since the towers with the mounted antennas
need to be in direct sight of each other, towers that are far apart need to be very tall.
The curvature of the earth as well as other blocking obstacles do not allow two short
towers to communicate by using microwaves. Repeaters are often needed for long-
distance communication. 
❑ Very high-frequency microwaves cannot penetrate walls. This characteristic can be
a disadvantage if receivers are inside buildings. 
❑ The microwave band is relatively wide, almost 299 GHz. Therefore wider subbands
can be assigned, and a high data rate is possible. 
❑ Use of certain portions of the band requires permission from authorities.
Unidirectional Antenna
Microwaves need unidirectional antennas that send out signals in one direction. Two
types of antennas are used for microwave communications: the parabolic dish and the
horn (see Figure 7.20). 
Figure 7.19 Omnidirectional antenna
Radio waves are used for multicast communications,
such as radio and television, and paging systems.
=== PAGE 239 ===
CHAPTER 7 TRANSMISSION MEDIA 201
A parabolic dish antenna is based on the geometry of a parabola: Every line
parallel to the line of symmetry (line of sight)  reflects off the curve at angles such that
all the lines intersect in a common point called the focus. The parabolic dish works as a
funnel, catching a wide range of waves and directing them to a common point. In
this way, more of the signal is recovere d than would be possible with a single-point
receiver.
Outgoing transmissions are broadcast through a horn aimed at the dish. The micro-
waves hit the dish and are deflected outward in a reversal of the receipt path.
A horn antenna looks like a gigantic scoop. Outgoing transmissions are broadcast
up a stem (resembling a handle) and deflected outward in a series of narrow parallel
beams by the curved head. Received transmissions are collected by the scooped shape of
the horn, in a manner similar to the parabolic dish, and are deflected down into the stem.
Applications
Microwaves, due to their unidirectional proper ties, are very useful when unicast (one-
to-one) communication is needed between th e sender and the receiver. They are used
in cellular phones (Chapter 16), satellite netw orks (Chapter 16), and wireless LANs
(Chapter 15). 
7.3.3 Infrared
Infrared waves, with frequencies from 300 GHz to 400 THz (wavelengths from 1 mm
to 770 nm), can be used for short-range communication. Infrared waves, having high
frequencies, cannot penetrate walls. This advantageous characteristic prevents interfer-
ence between one system and another; a short-range communication system in one
room cannot be affected by another system in the next room. When we use our infrared
remote control, we do not interfere with the use of the remote by our neighbors. How-
ever, this same characteristic makes infrared signals useless for long-range communica-
tion. In addition, we cannot use infrared waves outside a building because the sun’s
rays contain infrared waves that can interfere with the communication.
Figure 7.20 Unidirectional antennas
Microwaves are used for unicast communication such as cellular telephones,
satellite networks, and wireless LANs.
Waveguide
b. Horn antenna
Focus
a. Parabolic dish antenna
=== PAGE 240 ===
202 PART II PHYSICAL LAYER
Applications
The infrared band, almost 400 THz, has an excellent potential for data transmission.
Such a wide bandwidth can be used to transmit digital data with a very high data rate.
The Infrared Data Association (IrDA), an association for sponsoring the use of infrared
waves, has established standards for us ing these signals for communication between
devices such as keyboards, mice, PCs, and printers. For example, some manufacturers
provide a special port called the IrDA port that allows a wireless keyboard to commnicate
with a PC. The standard originally defined a data rate of 75 kbps for a distance up to
8 m. The recent standard defines a data rate of 4 Mbps. 
Infrared signals defined by IrDA transmit through line of sight; the IrDA port on
the keyboard needs to point to the PC for transmission to occur.
7.4 END-CHAPTER MATERIALS
7.4.1 Recommended Reading
For more details about subjects discussed in this chapter, we recommend the following
books. The items in brackets [. . .] refer to the reference list at the end of the text.
Books
Transmission media is discussed in [GW04] , [Sta04], and [Tan03]. [SSS05] gives full
coverage of transmission media.
7.4.2 Key Terms
Infrared signals can be used for short-range communication in a closed 
area using line-of-sight propagation
angle of incidence
Bayonet Neill-Concelman (BNC)
cladding
coaxial cable
core
critical angle
electromagnetic spectrum
fiber-optic cable
gauge
ground propagation
guided media
horn antenna
infrared wave
IrDA port
line-of-sight propagation
microwave
MT-RJ
multimode graded-index fiber
multimode step-index fiber
omnidirectional antenna
optical fiber
parabolic dish antenna
Radio Government (RG) rating
radio wave
reflection
refraction
RJ45
shielded twisted-pair (STP)
single-mode fiber
sky propagation
straight-tip (ST) connector
subscriber channel (SC) connector
transmission medium
twisted-pair cable
unguided medium
unidirectional antenna
unshielded twisted-pair (UTP)
wireless communication
=== PAGE 241 ===
CHAPTER 7 TRANSMISSION MEDIA 203
7.4.3 Summary
Transmission media are actually located below the physical layer and are directly con-
trolled by the physical layer. We could say that transmission media belong to layer
zero. 
A guided medium provides a physical  conduit from one device to another.
Twisted-pair cable consists of two insulated copper wires twisted together. Twisted-pair
cable is used for voice and data communica tions. Coaxial cable consists of a central
conductor and a shield. Coaxial cable is us ed in cable TV networks and traditional
Ethernet LANs. Fiber-optic cables are compos ed of a glass or plastic inner core sur-
rounded by cladding, all encased in an outside jacket. Fiber-optic transmission is
becoming increasingly popular due to its noi se resistance, low attenuation, and high-
bandwidth capabilities. Fiber-optic cable is used in backbone networks, cable TV net-
works, and Fast Ethernet networks.
Unguided media (free space) transport electromagnetic waves without the use of a
physical conductor. Wireless data ar e transmitted through ground propagation, sky
propagation, and line-of-sight propagation.Wi reless waves can be classified as radio
waves, microwaves, or infrared waves. Radio waves are omnidirectional; microwaves
are unidirectional. Microwaves are used for cellular phone, satellite, and wireless LAN
communications. Infrared waves are used for short-range communications such as
those between a PC and a peripheral device. They can also be used for indoor LANs.
7.5  PRACTICE SET
7.5.1 Quizzes
A set of interactive quizzes for this chapter can be found on the book website. It is
strongly recommended that the student take the quizzes to check his/her understanding
of the materials before continuing with the practice set.
7.5.2 Questions
Q7-1. What is the position of the transmission media in the OSI or the Internet
model?
Q7-2. Name the two major categories of transmission media.
Q7-3. How do guided media differ from unguided media?
Q7-4. What are the three major classes of guided media?
Q7-5. What is the function of the twisting in twisted-pair cable?
Q7-6. What is refraction? What is reflection? 
Q7-7. What is the purpose of cladding in an optical fiber?
Q7-8. Name the advantages of optical fiber over twisted-pair and coaxial cable.
Q7-9. How does sky propagation differ from line-of-sight propagation?
Q7-10. What is the difference between omni directional waves and unidirectional
waves?
=== PAGE 242 ===
204 PART II PHYSICAL LAYER
7.5.3 Problems
P7-1. Using Figure 7.6, tabulate the attenua tion (in dB) of a 18-gauge UTP for the
indicated frequencies and distances.    
P7-2. Use the results of Problem P7-1 to in fer that the bandwidth of a UTP cable
decreases with an increase in distance. 
P7-3. If the power at the beginning of a 1 Km 18-gauge UTP is 200 mw, what is the
power at the end for frequencies 1 KHz, 10 KHz, and 100 KHz? Use the
results of Problem P7-1. 
P7-4. Using Figure 7.9, tabulate the attenuation (in dB) of a 2.6/9.5 mm coaxial
cable for the indicated frequencies and distances.    
P7-5. Use the results of Problem P7-4 to infer that the bandwidth of a coaxial cable
decreases with the increase in distance. 
P7-6. If the power at the beginning of a 1 Km 2.6/9.5 mm coaxial cable is 200 mw,
what is the power at the end for frequencies 1 KHz, 10 KHz, and 100 KHz?
Use the results of Problem P7-4. 
P7-7. Calculate the bandwidth of the light for the following wavelength ranges
(assume a propagation speed of 2 × 10
8 m):
P7-8. The horizontal axes in Figures 7.6 and 7.9 represent frequencies. The horizon-
tal axis in Figure 7.16 represents wavelength. Can you explain the reason? If
the propagation speed in an optical fiber is 2 × 10
8 m, can you change the units
in the horizontal axis to frequency? Should the vertical-axis units be changed
too? Should the curve be changed too? 
Table 7.5
Attenuation for 18-gauge UTP
Distance dB at 1 KHz dB at 10 KHz dB at 100 KHz
1 Km
10 Km
15 Km
20 Km
Table 7.6 Attenuation for 2.6/9.5 mm coaxial cable
Distance dB at 1 KHz dB at 10 KHz dB at 100 KHz
1 Km
10 Km
15 Km
20 Km
a. 1000 to 1200 nm b. 1000 to 1400 nm
=== PAGE 243 ===
CHAPTER 7 TRANSMISSION MEDIA 205
P7-9. Using Figure 7.16, tabulate the attenuation (in dB) of an optical fiber for the indi-
cated wavelength and distances.    
P7-10. A light signal is travelling through a fiber. What is the delay in the signal if the
length of the fiber-optic cable is 10 m, 100 m, and 1 Km (assume a propaga-
tion speed of 2 × 10
8 m)? 
P7-11. A beam of light moves from one medium to another medium with less density.
The critical angle is 60 °. Do we have refraction or reflection for each of the
following incident angles? Show the bending of the light ray in each case. 
Table 7.7
Attenuation for optical fiber
Distance dB at 800 nm dB at 1000 nm dB at 1200 nm
1 Km
10 Km
15 Km
20 Km
a. 40° b. 60° c. 80°
=== PAGE 244 ===
